For many businesses, digital transformation is an imprecise term, with even more imprecise expectations that some magical technology intervention can propel them into new, more efficient and profitable states. While this is possible with faultless planning, piloting and operational management, for many businesses it is a more incremental development — one that requires a road map. Naturally a technology-related response to the Covid-19 pandemic varies across sectors, with health leading the way with new digital solutions. But finance was not far behind. At any given time, businesses will vary in their digital maturity, often depending on the sector they’re in and their quality of leadership. A new Sage research report, CFO 3.0 — Digital transformation beyond financial management tells us that leadership of digital transformation by companies is today as likely to be undertaken by the company’s CFO or other finance leader. This is largely because success in digital transformation requires business planning and agility in developing new business processes, something CFOs are well versed in. Looking at the evolution of finance leaders, the Sage report says their role is becoming a far more strategic one than simple number crunching. The pandemic crisis has unexpectedly enabled finance leaders to break down cultural barriers to innovation, which may previously have stood in the way of experimenting with new digital solutions, especially in the field of remote working. This acceleration of digital transformation offers a positive outlook for the future. The difference between success and failure in digital transformation CFOs today are faced with more pressure than ever before to modernise and digitise. Many large businesses turning over billions of rand are still managed using little more than spreadsheets. This must change — and it is. The Sage report finds that 90% of senior financial decisionmakers have adopted emerging technologies in some form, while 87% of CFOs play a role in digital transformation and say that emerging financial management technology is key to success in their role. They have done so as they grapple with the explosive growth of both qualitative and quantitative data, operations growth and complexity, the need to overcome information silos, a growing number of data analysis tools, and more. Staff turnover remains an ever present challenge, leaving huge knowledge gaps as new employees arrive. Many finance leaders know they must digitise workflows and data — and fast. However, the worst course of action would be to invest in technology for its own sake. Before investing a single rand, CFOs must consider four factors that are likely to determine the success or otherwise of a digital transformation strategy for their business: Digital transformation can appear to be an overwhelming undertaking. However, by using the above factors in designing an initiative, then the right team, technologies and strategies will become clear. This article was paid for by Sage.