On November 12 2020, BCX announced the winners of the BCX Digital Innovation Awards 2020. The announcement was made at the prestigious Sunday Times Top 100 Companies Awards via live stream. BCX is a proud sponsor of the Sunday Times Top 100 Companies Awards for the second year. In 2019, BCX established the Digital Innovation Awards to recognise digital innovation excellence in SA, focusing on corporates and small- and medium-sized businesses (SMEs). In 2020, 28 shortlisted candidates pitched in front of five judges to achieve the title of Digital Innovation Award Champion in their respective categories. Jonas Bogoshi, BCX said: “2020 was a year of disruption that forced businesses and industries to innovate and think outside of the proverbial box.  Businesses had to reinvent and reimagine their services and products within very challenging socioeconomic conditions to unlock greater customer value. “This year we had phenomenal entrants into the BCX Digital Innovation Awards, many of whom turned adversity into opportunity for their businesses. I am encouraged by the level of innovation and imagination that exists in South African businesses, and was delighted to have announced the winners tonight,” he said. One of the main criteria for judges this year, was to gauge the results, set targets and impact to society that the innovations have had or made. BCX is proud to announce the winners of the BCX Digital Innovations Awards as follows: 3rd place: FinChatBotFinChatBot is a fintech startup, was founded in Cape Town by two passionate French entrepreneurs, Antoine and Romain, to help financial service providers acquire and retain customers using artificial intelligence-powered conversations. 2nd place: Ozow RevolutionA drive toward digital inclusion for all, Ozow Revolution was created to make digital payments available to everyone and creates greater opportunity to participate in the digital economy. Winner: Bottles appBottles, a start-up app providing on-demand alcohol delivery, partnered with grocery store giant Pick n Pay in mid-2018. The partnership helped Bottles scale their app across SA, delivering for more than 50 Pick n Pay Liquor stores nationwide. The company leveraged their existing partnership and infrastructure to pivot their business, enabling it to deliver grocery and essential goods during lockdown. The app is now partnering with more than 90 Pick n Pay stores and helping deliver groceries in Joburg, Pretoria, Durban, Cape Town, Bloemfontein and Port Elizabeth. 3rd place: Old Mutual WealthEnabling real-time holistic financial planning conversations and trade-offs through digital capabilities, Old Mutual Wealth aims to simplify complex financial planning for clients through the use of in-house technology and state-of-the-art financial planning tools. 2nd place: Netcare VirtualCareNetcare VirtualCare is a new telehealth platform for virtual doctor consults offering patients greater choice, safety and easier access to quality health care. A doctor consultation no longer requires a patient to travel to a consulting room or hospital to receive the required care. Winner: Checkers Sixty60The innovative mobile grocery delivery app allows a customer to shop in as little as 60 seconds and get their groceries delivered within 60 minutes. “Congratulations to the winners and the runners up. We hope to see them rise in size and influence, as well as in the impact they make, not only in the country but at a global level,” said Bogoshi. For more awards details visit the website. This article was paid for by BCX.