Did you know that every year more than 600-million people fall sick, and more than 420,000 die prematurely as a result of foodborne illnesses? Nearly a third of all foodborne deaths occur in children under five years of age. Very sobering facts. Food safety is necessary for maintaining a healthy population. With many diseases like HIV/Aids leaving millions of South Africans immunocompromised, it’s imperative that what enters people’s mouths as nutrition, does not end up making them ill.  And now, with the Covid-19 pandemic affecting us all, keeping foodborne diseases at bay needs to be a top priority. June 9 is World Accreditation Day, and Sanas (SA National Accreditation System) invites you for a Business Day Dialogue LIVE that focuses on the role of accreditation in improving food safety. Whether you’re a farmer, supplier, brand-owner, producer, or a consumer, understanding how to implement food safety practices and manage hazards to improve food safety is essential. It is through the accreditation of players in the supply chain that consumers can feel confident that what they’re feeding themselves and their families, is tested, inspected and certified to be safe. Join Joanne Joseph and expert panel for this in-depth discussion: Date: Tuesday, June 9 2020Time: 9am to 10amCost: free  SA National Accreditation System (Sanas) is the only accreditation body in the republic providing accreditation of conformity assessment and calibration and monitoring of good laboratory practice. Sanas has accredited several conformity assessment bodies (CABs) operating in different areas within the food industry. These accredited CABs support the food industry through the evaluation of food samples, products, services, management systems or personnel against specified requirements. Conformity assessment is used to check that products are fit and safe for consumption against a standard, a code of practice or regulatory requirements. Conformity assessment provides a means for preventing unsafe, unhealthy, or environmentally harmful products from entering the marketplace. Accreditation therefore provides a reliable monitoring tool to support the work of food safety. Find out more at www.sanas.co.za.