Consumer goods group AVI, the brands of which include footwear retailer Spitz and seafood company I&J, is pinning its hopes on cost-controls as it battles aggressive competition in SA’s weak economic environment. The group reported a 3.8% fall in headline earnings per share (HEPS)for its half year to end-December, saying on Monday that December trading was weaker than anticipated, with many of its competitors aggressively cutting prices to maintain market share. Headline earnings is a widely used profit measure in SA, stripping out once-off items, such as impairments. The group said it is hedging its foreign currency exposures and raw materials, and has secured these at levels that will ensure sound profitability. Fuel for I&J's fleet, for example, is an important cost. The group also expects lower financing costs to help improve profitability. During the half year I&J sold its interest in a joint venture with Simplot in Australia, realising proceeds of R633m and a capital gain, after tax, of R374m. Net debt fell to R1.65bn, from R2.51bn. AVI CFO Owen Cressey said the Simplot disposal had allowed the company to reduce debt to near its targeted range. Net debt to capital employed stood at 25.2% at the end of the period, from 36.1% previously. The group cut its interim dividend 3% to 160c per share, saying efforts to manage costs are ongoing, and it is still considering acquisition opportunities. “Anticipated sales volumes remain key to achieving this growth and we will continue to react quickly to market changes as we pursue the most appropriate balance of price, sales volume and profit margins for each of our brands,” AVI said. AVI CEO Simon Crutchley said on Monday that current market events were creating significantly more volatility in long-term costs, especially in terms of the exchange rate. This was a problem facing all SA businesses that needed to import, he said, and the group wouldn't necessarily hold off on cost increases due to shifting consumer behaviour, referring to trading at Spitz. “We are pricing against input cost pressures, because there comes a point where those prices go up,” he said. The company was heavily focused on managing procurement costs, however, he said. In afternoon trade on Monday, AVI’s share price was down 1.72% to R73.53. gernetzkyk@businesslive.co.za