Capitec’s largest shareholder PSG says it is considering unbundling part or all of its R46bn stake in the bank, a decision that has been welcomed by investors. “We think it’s the right move. Our feeling is that a partial unbundling will not remove the discount, so the only way it would happen is if PSG’s entire stake is unbundled,” said founder and co-chief investment officer of Anchor Capital, Peter Armitage. At 1pm, PSG was trading 3.5% higher at R165.57 per share while Capitec was 6% higher at R934.15 per share. PSG cited new legislation that may deem it a financial conglomerate, a development that would increase its administrative burden as one reason for considering the unbundling. The other reason is the persistent and steep discount at which PSG trades in relation to the sum-of-the-parts of its various, underlying listed investments. PSG’s stake 30.7% stake in Capitec accounted for approximately 74% of its value as at the end of February, worth R46bn. But PSG announced in its full-year results to the end of February that the average discount between the value of its underlying investments, which include the likes of Capitec, PSG Konsult, and Zeder, over the financial year was approximately 23%. At year-end this had widened to 32%. “The discount has widened more aggressively recently to over 30%, and this has been a feature of our market as the same trend has played out at Remgro and African Rainbow Capital (ARC). Investors have fallen out of favour with the conglomerate structure, questioning how much value is added by the parent holding company and its contribution to the growth of the underlying investment,” said chief investment officer of Ashburton Investments Patrice Rassou. Anchor Capital points to an interesting implication should PSG proceed with unbundling its entire stake in Capitec. “PSG Konsult would then account for approximately 45% of PSG’s value, and that could possibly mean that they are left with the same problem — they still have a discount on the remaining businesses,” said Armitage. In the event of an unbundling, there could be some short-term pressure on the Capitec share price as PSG investors sell their shares, according to Armitage. The Prudential Authority (PA), the regulatory arm of the SA Reserve Bank, has noted that SA’s financial systems is dominated by a large number of large financial institutions, leading to a highly concentrated market, which increases the contagion risk in the financial system. The Conduct of Financial Institutions Bill had been expected to be tabled before parliament before the end of 2019, and provides for greater regulatory oversight. The bill has not yet been tabled, the Treasury said on Wednesday. Update: April 29 2020This article has been updated with new information and comment throughout. gernetzkyk@businesslive.co.za thompsonw@businesslive.co.za