Dube TradePort Special Economic Zone (SEZ), Southern Africa's global manufacturing and air logistics platform, provides a competitive business operating environment for businesses involved in manufacturing and export. Created to be a world-class development, Dube TradePort SEZ offers globally integrated logistics and manufacturing infrastructure with support for a range of airport-related activities including cargo operations, warehousing, agriculture, commercial real estate for office, retail and hospitality. Dube TradePort Corporation, a public entity of the KwaZulu-Natal provincial government, is tasked with the development of the precinct. Benefits associated with operating within this zone are designed to promote business growth, revenue generation, employment creation, the export of value-added commodities and attracting both foreign and local investment — all enhancing SA’s manufacturing and export capabilities. Crucially, Dube TradePort SEZ’s efficient infrastructure, seamless support services provision and available incentives give businesses located there a significant competitive edge. Strategically positioned at the intersection of local and global intermodal transport routes, SEZ is seamlessly integrated with intermodal road, rail and port infrastructure, providing exceptional supply chain efficiencies and market access. The precinct, a greenfield development covering more than 3,800ha 30km north of Durban, is a 50-year, master-planned airfreight and passenger hub comprising four business zones and a telecommunications platform: SEZ status was conferred in December 2016, adding impetus to investor interest in the fast-growing industrial node. Presently, two zones are designated SEZ, namely Dube TradeZone and Dube AgriZone, with plans to extend this to other zones and phases. Becoming a SEZ has enhanced its industrial development agenda, radically augmenting Dube TradePort Corporation’s ability to attract both domestic and foreign direct investment capable of promoting strong local production capabilities within targeted focus sectors: Dube TradePort SEZ, also has an on-site one-stop-shop facility providing a single point of contact and interface for businesses, and government agencies and departments. The one-stop-shop assists with registrations, licensing, visa services, and investor aftercare services. Incentive benefits available to investors include: This article was paid for by Dube TradePort.