International travel will only be permitted under the new level 3 regulations if the traveller can provide a valid certificate of a negative Covid-19 test obtained not more than 72 hours before the date of travel, new regulations published on Tuesday say. The regulations were published in the government gazette by co-operative government and traditional affairs minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma under the Disaster Management Act. President Cyril Ramaphosa announced on Monday night that SA was moving back to the stricter level 3 of the lockdown from level 1 because of the surge in the number of infections. He announced a 9pm to 6am curfew; a prohibition on the sale, distribution and transportation of alcohol; the closure of night clubs, bars, shebeens and taverns; and the compulsory wearing of masks in public places. In terms of the regulations, the failure by travellers to submit a negative test certificate will mean that they will be required to do an antigen test on arrival at their own cost. If tested positive for Covid-19 travellers will be required to quarantine themselves at their own cost. International air travel is restricted to OR Tambo, King Shaka and Cape Town international airports. The regulations stipulate that masks will not have to be worn by people undertaking vigorous exercise in a public place, provided that they maintain a distance of at least 1.5m from any other person. Health minister Zweli Mkhize will announce what is considered “vigorous” exercise. Mask wearing will be compulsory at places of work. In terms of the regulations bus and taxi services may not carry more than 70% of the licensed capacity for long-distance travel (200km or more) and may carry 100% of the licensed capacity for short trips. All passengers will be required to wear a mask. The tasting and selling of liquor to the public by registered wineries, wine farms and other similar establishments registered as micro manufacturers, are prohibited. However, alcohol can be transported for export purposes. All social gatherings, including faith-based gatherings, political gatherings and traditional council meetings are prohibited for two weeks after which this measure will be reviewed. Gatherings at restaurants, conferencing, dining and entertainment facilities gyms, cinemas, theatres, casinos, museums, galleries, libraries and archives are limited to 50 persons or less for indoor venues and 100 persons or less for outdoor venues. If the venue is too small to hold the prescribed number of persons observing a distance of at least 1.5m from each other,  not more than 50% of the capacity of the venue may be used. Cinemas, theatres, casinos, gyms and restaurants among other establishments must close at 8pm. Hotels, lodges, bed and breakfasts, timeshare facilities, resorts and guest houses are allowed full capacity of the available rooms for accommodation, with patrons observing a distance of at least 1.5m from each other when in common areas. Attendance of a funeral is limited to a maximum of 50 persons as long as they observe a distance of at least 1.5m from each other. If the venue is too small to hold 50 persons under these conditions then not more than 50% of the capacity of the venue may be used. Night vigils are not allowed.  Funerals cannot last for more than two hours. Initiation practices are prohibited nationally with no new initiations permitted, except for those who are already in an initiation school in the Eastern Cape who will be allowed to complete it. ensorl@businesslive.co.za