London/Singapore — World stocks scaled new peaks and oil marched higher on Thursday as investors lapped up risky assets on hopes of a US fiscal stimulus and the Federal Reserve’s pledge to keep pumping cash into markets. From stocks to safe-haven gold and volatile cryptocurrency bitcoin, financial assets were in festive mood. Bitcoin hit another all-time high after first shattering the $20,000 level on Wednesday. US congressional negotiators were “closing in on” a $900bn Covid-19 aid bill expected to include $600-$700 stimulus cheques to individuals, lawmakers said on Wednesday. Such cheques issued during the spring led to money pouring into stock markets and bitcoin from punters, helping stocks recover quickly from the Covid-19 blow. A trader in London pointed to chances of a new retail-led boost to stock markets. The general risk-on mood sent the dollar to 2.5-year lows against major peers, while the MSCI world stock index reached a new high of 639.64. The index has climbed 16% since the end of October. Since then, multiple Covid-19 vaccine breakthroughs have been announced. “While we expect stocks to benefit further from positive news on vaccine rollouts and US fiscal support, the same cannot be said for the dollar,” said Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management. “We see further [dollar] weakness ahead.” European stocks and the euro rallied for the fourth straight session as investors built up positions in riskier assets, anticipating a sharp economic recovery in 2021 backed by wider vaccine rollouts and ultra-easy monetary policy. The pound hit May 2018-highs on hopes of a post-Brexit trade deal. In Asia, MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares excluding Japan rose 0.6% to a record high. Japan’s Nikkei rose 0.2% — just shy of a 29-year peak. Wall Street stock futures were pointing to more upside, with S&P 500 futures hitting a record high after the Nasdaq’s record close on Wednesday. Santa rally Brent crude oil futures rose 1.2% to $51.71 a barrel, their highest since early March — before overproduction fears and virus worries pushed oil prices off a cliff. “My suspicion is markets are inclined to extend this rally for two reasons,” said Vishnu Varathan, head economist at Mizuho in Singapore, citing US monetary policy support and vaccine rollouts. “If new infection numbers don’t go crazy ... I think there is some scope for a ‘Santa rally’ into the end of the year,” he said. US Fed chair Jerome Powell vowed on Wednesday to keep pouring cash into markets until the US economic recovery is secure. Bond traders were disappointed he did not extend the US Fed’s purchase programme deeper down the yield curve, and US treasuries sold off at longer tenors, but others took it as a signal the bank will have their back. The Swiss National Bank kept its ultra-expansive monetary policy on hold, keeping the world’s lowest interest rates and staying ready to launch currency interventions despite being labelled a currency manipulator by the US. The Swiss Franc was last at 0.8835. Better-than-expected labour data in Australia pushed the Aussie as high as $0.7624, its strongest since mid-2018. The Aussie is also riding high on surging prices for iron ore and a mood that has pushed currencies in Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Taiwan, Sweden and Norway to milestone peaks. The kiwi rose to its strongest since early 2018 after New Zealand’s economic growth beat expectations. US treasuries steadied, with the yield on benchmark 10-year government bonds flat at 0.9246%. Bitcoin extended gains after breaking past $20,000 overnight. It rose 8% to $23,058. Investors are attracted by its momentum — it is up 200% this year — and its purported resistance to inflation because of its limited supply. Gold rose 0.3% to $1,869 an ounce. Reuters