SA expects the first delivery of Covid-19 vaccines only after March 2021, while Discovery Health says funding has been set aside for 2- million of its members to get the vaccine as it throws its weight behind a national effort to source a cost-effective supplier. President Cyril Ramaphosa said on Monday evening SA expected to receive the first delivery of vaccines in the second quarter of 2021 under the World Health Organisation's (WHO) Covax scheme and the government was holding parallel talks with vaccine makers for a larger supply. "We will make further announcements once firm agreements are in place," he said. "As a country, we need to build a strong partnership between the government and business to augment the resources required in financing additional vaccines necessary to achieve herd immunity," he said, adding talks were at an advanced stage with the private sector. The cost and timeframe for the vaccine rollout have yet to be finalised as Discovery, other medical aids and government agencies develop a strategy to acquire a suitable vaccine, chief commercial officer at Discovery Health Dr Ronald Whelan told Business Day. Discovery is working through a lot of data on the efficacy of various vaccines, especially as new variants of the coronavirus are found, while others await peer-reviewed clinical trials and regulatory body approvals around the world, he said. Discovery has 2.7-million members in its medical aid of which 2-million are older than 16, which is the minimum age to receive a vaccine, he said, adding it is difficult to put a value on the funding Discovery will set aside because the prices of  vaccines range from $5 up to $30 a dose. “There are a lot of moving parts and a lot of uncertainty at the moment,” he said. “Discovery Health Medical Scheme has already approved funding for its members, so as soon as the vaccine is available in SA those members will have access to that vaccine.” The vaccine would have to be suitable for the SA environment, with the logistical and storage constraints taken into consideration, particularly for vaccines that have to be stored in ultra-cold conditions and present almost insurmountable problems in SA, and some other countries. “We do like, from a cold-chain perspective, the Johnson & Johnson and AstraZeneca vaccines, given that they are generally stored in standard vaccine fridges or, in some cases, at room temperature,” Whelan said, adding a single-dose vaccine was  preferred    to a double-dose one. Discovery is working closely with other private-sector players, as well as the government, to ensure there is a national rollout of a vaccine at the same time rather than favouring medical aid scheme members. SA has paid R283m to secure its place in the Covax scheme that aims to ensure low- and middle-income countries are able to access  vaccines. The payment was made by the Solidarity Fund and  will secure vaccines for 10% of SA’s nearly 60-million people. SA has breached the 1-million mark for infections, and there is talk of further restrictions being imposed to curb the resurgence of infections that has left private and public hospitals running out of ICU beds and oxygen in four provinces. Discovery is concerned about infection rates for inland provinces such as Gauteng as holidaymakers return from hotspot provinces such as the Eastern Cape and KwaZulu-Natal A prioritisation procedure will apply, with the first people to get the vaccine being front-line health workers, followed by people at risk of more severe manifestations of the coronavirus,  then the scheme’s broader-based members. People with co-morbidities or underlying illnesses,  as well as older people, will be prioritised in line with global and local standards. Discovery’s data shows 36% of people over  60 who are infected with the coronavirus are admitted to hospital, with that figure jumping to 60% for those over  80, Whelan said. The intention is to keep as many vulnerable people out of hospital as ICU and high-care beds run out in the public and private sector in hotspot provinces of the Eastern Cape, Western Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and, increasingly, in Gauteng, he said. Whelan said the target is to secure enough vaccines for the entire country, with the combined efforts of other companies and the national health department. “We are committed to an equitable rollout of vaccines, and [discussions are under way] to leverage the buying power to get a good commercial arrangement from vaccine manufacturers,” he said. “We have very deep and positive relationships with the government in this pandemic and we’ll see the the same thing play out in vaccines as the government and private sector work hand-in-hand to secure the right vaccine at the right price for the whole of SA,” he said. “The vaccine is really only effective if we vaccinate the whole country. We need to achieve herd immunity across SA.” Update: December 28 2020This article has been updated with comments from President Cyril Ramaphosa. seccombea@businesslive.co.za