After untangling a web of fraudulent transactions, Steinhoff is bracing for more pain as it tallies legal claims that have topped a whopping R170bn. Steinhoff uncovered a €6.4bn (about R120bn) hole in its accounts in 2017, triggering a share price collapse and multiple lawsuits from former business partners and aggrieved shareholders that include former chair Christo Wiese. In an annual report issued on Wednesday, which showed the embattled retail group suffered a 50% wider annual loss to €1.8bn,  the 50-year old company listed a number of  claims worth at least R173bn from those alleging they were duped into buying worthless shares in the company that was once a must-have in fund managers’ portfolios. The litigation claims are the biggest challenge facing the group after its management team, with the help of PwC, worked for months to unravel a complex scam in which intercompany deals worth €6.4bn  were recorded as external income to hide losses and inflate assets. Shares in Steinhoff suffered their biggest one-day drop in two months, slumping nearly 7% to R9.50 and valuing the company at R4.1bn. The company was worth more than R200bn before the scandal. “As we look ahead, we are clear that the best way for us to protect and enhance value for all stakeholders is to resolve the litigation and reduce our debt and financing costs,” Steinhoff said in the annual report. With a stake of about 20% acquired in 2014, when he sold his company Pepkor to Steinhoff in exchange for shares, Wiese suffered the most from the share price collapse in 2017 when  Markus Jooste resigned as CEO after the company said it had picked up what it called “accounting irregularities”. Wiese has put in a claim for R59bn. Jooste has denied any wrongdoing. Steinhoff, which is registered in the Netherlands, is also facing a class-action lawsuit from Dutch shareholder group VEB, which is seeking unspecified compensation for damages suffered as a result of misleading information about the company’s financial health. Other aggrieved partners include Lancaster — an investment firm that used a loan from the R2-trillion government employees’ pensions investor, the Public Investment Corporation, to buy into Steinhoff — with an R11.6bn claim. GT Ferreira, who co-founded FirstRand, is demanding R1.2bn for swapping his trust’s shares in investment heavyweight PSG Group for Steinhoff. Steinhiff said it expects the costs of tackling the legal claims to be significant in the coming months after coughing up the equivalent of R3bn  paying the PwC team for untangling its financial statements and hiring advisers to restructure its mountain of debt. The company’s legal woes coincided with the Covid-19 pandemic, which left most of its retail outlets in SA, Europe and Australia closed for months as part of government-imposed lockdown orders. The company suffered a €1.8bn loss in the year to the end of March compared with  €1.2bn  a year earlier. Longer term, the company would focus its attention on reducing its debt, which stood at €9.6bn as at the end of March. Steinhoff, which struck an agreement with creditors to hold off of any debt claims for a few years while it cleans up its balance sheet, has also been selling off assets to bolster its cash balances. It is yet to come to a definitive decision about its European division, Pepco, which it has previously said would consider floating on a stock exchange. /With Karl Gernetzky Update: July 1 2020This article has been updated with comment and information, including on Steinhoff’s share price. gernetzkyk@businesslive.co.za