In a move that could cut into budget retailer Pepkor’s turf, Foschini owner TFG unveiled a R480m deal to scoop up dis-counter Jet from Edcon, one of the highest-profile corporate casualties of the Covid-19 crisis. One of SA’s largest resellers of Adidas and Nike products said its bid for 371 commercially viable Jet stores had been conditionally accepted by business rescue practitioners at Edcon, which tumbled into a form of bankruptcy protection in April after burning through cash to cover losses related to closure of its stores during the hard lockdown announced at the end of March. With this deal, TFG, which also owns upmarket furniture chain @Home, will go head to head with Pepkor, the owner of the budget-friendly chains Ackermans and Pep, which are expected to be some of the biggest winners in the recession as deep pay-cuts limit debt-laden consumers options to buy high-end goods. Pepkor, which operates in 11 African countries, had about R70bn of revenue — 65% of which is clothing sales — in its year to September 2019, compared to TFG’s R38.5bn in the 12 months to March. "Jet is a leading Southern African retailer [by brand recognition and market share] and would provide TFG with a strategically important expansion into the value segment," TFG said. TFG’s share price closed more than 9% higher at R67.83 on Monday, its biggest one-day gain in almost six weeks. Casparus Treurnicht, analyst at Gryphon Asset Management, lauded the price tag and deal as having strategic logic. Sensible "I think it is a sensible approach to gain entry to this market. Setting up shop from the beginning would be a costly exercise and building a brand would be a lengthy exercise. Let’s assume no debt, then they are paying R1.3m per store. Not bad at all," Treurnicht said. The deal includes a distribution centre in Durban, a loyalty programme and existing stock with minimum value of R800m. As part of the offer, TFG will assume the operational commitments associated with the commercially viable stores only, such as employee and lease commitments, albeit on a renegotiated basis. The announcement of the transaction is a dramatic U-turn for TFG CEO Anthony Thunström, who said in June that the company was not interested in buying any of Edcon’s assets as its back-end IT systems were difficult to untangle from Edgars’s computer system. Treurnicht said he was concerned about the credibility of management following previous denials that the company had interest in Jet. "It is a worry that they denied looking at buying Jet," he said. For Edcon creditors, which include the R2-trillion government employees’ pensions investor, the Public Investment Corporation and landlords, the transaction is an opportunity to salvage some value from a sought-after asset in Edcon’s portfolio. The transaction comes a week after the business rescue team announced the sale of some Edgars stores to Retailability, owner of the Legit chain, for an undisclosed amount. Edcon, which is facing liability claims worth at least R6.7bn from creditors that include Absa and Goldman Sachs, has been on shaky ground for much of the past decade. The lockdown measures that kept its stores closed for much of April, hastened its painful reckoning with creditors as the company burnt through much of the R2.7bn bailout package advanced a year earlier. It picked Piers Marsden and Lance Schapiro to run the business rescue process, which allows the company to delay creditor claims against it and its assets while turnaround specialists work out if it can survive. But rehabilitating Edcon, which employs 17,500 permanent workers and another 5,000 seasonal workers, proved difficult as CEO Grant Pattison had already shrunk the business to half the size he considered healthy under normal econo-mic conditions. An inability to raise further capital forced the business rescue team to opt for an accelerated sale process, a rarely used corporate finance tool allowing a distressed company to sell itself or assets in a matter of weeks. "We are pleased that these deals, if successfully concluded, will allow for that continuity and contribution to the economy, positively impacting the entire retail value chain, including suppliers and landlords," the business rescue team said.