London — Oil prices fell on Monday on the worry that a global oil glut may persist even as coronavirus pandemic lockdowns start to ease, amid a fresh spat between the US and China over the origin of the virus. Brent crude was down 86c, or 3.3%, at $25.58, at 8.28am GMT. US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude fell $1.57, or 7.9%, to $18.21. While global oil demand is expected to modestly recover from April lows as countries ease some lockdown measures, the glut created over months in storage facilities will loom over the markets. “As oil inventories are likely still increasing over the coming weeks, oil prices remain vulnerable to renewed setbacks,” said UBS analyst Giovanni Staunovo. However, Goldman Sachs was more optimistic than before about the rise of oil prices next year due to lower crude production and a partial recovery in oil demand. The Wall Street bank raised its 2021 forecast for global benchmark Brent to $55.63 a barrel from $52.50 earlier. The bank hiked its estimate for WTI to $51.38 a barrel from $48.50 previously. Signs that the output cuts may help reduce the supply overhang have emerged with the narrowing of Brent’s contango — the market structure in which later-dated prices are higher than prompt supplies. The six-month spread of Brent futures hit its narrowest in almost a month at a discount of around $6.50, up from a record wide discount of almost $14 in late-March, reflecting decreasing oversupply expectations and making storage for later sale less profitable. The re-emergence of trade tension between the US and China also weighed on prices. Adding to US President Donald Trump’s threat last week to impose tariffs on China, secretary of state Mike Pompeo said on Sunday there was “a significant amount of evidence” that the new coronavirus emerged from a Chinese laboratory. “The resumption of the trade war will be detrimental to oil prices over the long term,” said Stephen Innes, chief global market strategist at financial services firm AxiCorp. Concern about weak manufacturing data in Asia and Europe, assessed by purchasing managers index (PMI) of manufacturing companies, also put pressure on oil prices. In Asia, a series of PMIs from IHS Markit fell deeper into contraction from March, with some diving to record lows and others hitting levels last seen during the 2008/2009 global financial crisis. PMIs in France, the eurozone’s second-biggest economy, dropped in April to its lowest level on record. IHS Markit’s final PMI for German manufacturing, which accounts for about a fifth of Europe’s largest economy, shrank at the fastest rate on record. The dollar surged against most major currencies on Monday amid the fear that the 2019 US-China dispute will be re-ignited. Oil is usually priced in dollars so a stronger greenback makes crude more expensive for buyers with other currencies. Reuters