In the Business Beyond Covid series, CEOs and other business leaders and experts in their sectors look to the future after Covid-19. What effect has the pandemic and resulting lockdown had on their industries and the SA economy as a whole? Which parts will bounce back first and which will never be the same again? Most importantly, they try to answer the question: where to from here? In February 2020, the presidential commission on the fourth industrial revolution (4IR) finalised its recommendations. As it did so an unexpected and unwelcome tsunami was gathering on the horizon. On March 26 the country went into a national lockdown in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. It is still far too early to understand the ramifications of the pandemic on SA, our economy and institutions. However, one immediate and obvious consequence has been the rapid adoption of digital technology. This is driven by necessity as the world has been catapulted into the 4IR era. In recent years, many digital transformation initiatives have failed, both in SA and internationally. In an article in Forbes magazine on September 30 2019, Blake Morgan wrote that 70% of digital transformations fail. While each failed transformation initiative can be attributed to specific reasons, a common theme is a lack of buy-in. Either executive support for the proposed initiative is not sufficient or change management is unsuccessful. People have a natural propensity to resist change, and digital transformation usually involves profound and significant change in how people are expected, or required, to behave. In SA, the challenge of creating a new digital world is compounded by other inhibitors to digital transformation such as poor connectivity, lack of digital literacy, and a low level of access to suitable technology, such as smartphones. Detailed case studies of how specific organisations and sectors in SA are responding to the pandemic are still to be written. We have, however, been collecting some of our own observations and those of others. We have used these to inform the comments that follow. The sudden decision by government to impose a general lockdown gave companies and institutions only three days to move to a work-from-home (WFH) policy. Different sectors dealt with this enormous challenge in different ways, some coping better than others: We could list other sectors. Driven by necessity, individuals and institutions are willingly adopting digital technology to survive and continue operations. And — most importantly — the technology adopted has been existing applications that are readily available. This digital transformation has been achieved at a very low cost using technology that is free, some of it open source, and all of it easy to use. We have no way of knowing what will happen beyond the current Covid-19 emergency. One thing that seems to be certain, however, is that we will never completely return to the pre-coronavirus status quo. It is also very important that this change to society brings about massive transformation in societal norms that will not leave the poorer members of society behind again. It is our belief that the pandemic has removed some of the significant inhibitors to digital transformation in SA. These are: One of the key principles at the heart of the presidential commission and much of the discussion that has taken place around 4IR is “technological determinism”, that is, technology drives change. The response to the Covid-19 pandemic implies that, rather than technological determinism, we are seeing the opposite driver for change, namely “social determinism”. It would be a useful exercise for the presidential commission to examine this opposite causal relationship in developing a strategy for 4IR in the post Covid-19 SA. • Dwolatzky, an emeritus professor at Wits University, is director of the Joburg Centre for Software Engineering; Harris is CEO of Altron Nexus.